+++
date = '2024-07-04'
title = 'Three Phases of Growth, Infinite Finite, Drinking in a Bar, Foxes with Torches'
+++

28 Sivan 5784

### Chumash Rashi

"And on the following day Moses came to the Tent of Testimony, and behold, Aaron's staff for the house of Levi had blossomed! It gave forth blossoms, sprouted buds, and produced ripe almonds." (Bamidbar 17:23)

Why did the Torah use three expressions for the process of growth? Rashi makes it clear that these words refer to the natural phases of a fruits growth. The Rebbeim explains, "The bearing of fruit by a dry stick of wood would surely have sufficed as a divine sign of Aaron's chosenness. But G-d did not simply make almonds appear on Aaron's staff. Rather, He stimulated in it the full natural process of budding, blossoming, and the emergence and the ripening of the fruit. Aaron's staff defied nature's laws and restrictions, yet it conformed to the phases of growth that the almond naturally undergoes. It transcended nature, but did so on nature's own terms." This was all for the purpose of bringing the Jewish people to a recognition of the divine reality which underlies the natural reality we encounter in our everyday lives.

### Tanya

"The 'breath of His mouth' could have diffused without end and limit and created worlds infinite in their quantity and quality ... The Holy One, blessed be He, however, contracted the light and life-force that could diffuse from the 'breath of His mouth'" (Shaar Hayichud Vehaemunah, Chapter 7)

The world could have been infite. Hashem, however, desired it to be finite, so He made it so.

### Rambam

"A person should not drink at a party of gentiles even though boiled wine which is not forbidden [is being served] or he is drinking from his own utensils. If the majority of the attendants of the party are Jewish, it is permitted. We may not drink the beer that they make from dates, figs, or the like. [This is forbidden] only in the place where they are sold. If, however, one brought the beer home and drank it there, it is permitted. For the fundamental point of the decree is that one should not feast with [a gentile]." (Sefer Kedushah, Hilchos Ma'achalot Assurot 17:10)

We thus see that the Rambam holds that drinking in any social setting, whether mevushal wine or beer, whether in a bar or in a gentiles home, with a majority of gentiles is forbidden. Sepharadim bring this as Halacha, Ashekanzim are lenient, even for alchoholic beverages, as long as the environment is not contrary to Jewish values (https://shulchanaruchharav.com/halacha/from-the-ravs-desk-going-to-a-bar-and-having-alcoholic-beverages/).

### Tanakh

Shoftim Chapter 15: Samson wants to be with his wife and brings her a young goat. Her father refuses to let him in, explaining he has given her in marriage to Samson's friend. Instead he offers him her sister. Samson does not agree. He gathers 300 foxes and ties their tails together with a torch in between. He sets loose in the Phillistines fields, burning their crop. The Phillistines inquire as to who and why the arson happened. They kill the father-in-law and wife of Samson. Samson takes further revenge against the Phillistine soldiers who carried out this act, killing many men. Samson retreats to Jewish territory. The Phillistines approach Judah with 3000 men asking for Samson to be handed out. The tribe of Judah approaches Samson. He has them swear that they won't harm him, but allows himself to be tied with ropes and handed out to the Phillistines. Samson breaks free of his ropes and kills 1000 Phillistines with a jawbone of a donkey. He becomes thirsty and prays to Hashem for water. Hashem lets water flow from the jawbone. Samson judges Israel from 20 years.
